.TH RTGREP 1 "2025-09-06" "rtgrep x.x.x" "Real-Time Grep Manual"
.SH NAME
rtgrep \- real-time interactive grep utility
.SH SYNOPSIS
.B rtgrep
[\fIOPTIONS\fR] [\fIPATTERN\fR] 
.SH DESCRIPTION
.B rtgrep
is an interactive, real-time grep utility that provides a two-pane terminal interface for searching through files. It displays grep results in real-time as you type search patterns, making it ideal for quickly exploring and searching through codebases and text files.

The interface consists of two panes:
.IP \(bu 2
.B Output Field
- The upper pane displays matching lines from grep results
.IP \(bu 2
.B Input Field
- The bottom pane where you enter search patterns

When you type a pattern and pause for 100ms, rtgrep automatically executes a grep search and displays the results. Only one grep process runs at a time, and typing while a search is running will kill the current process and start a new one when you pause.
.SH OPTIONS
.TP
.BR \-g " " \fICOMMAND\fR
Use custom grep command instead of the default "grep -rn --color=always". This allows you to specify different grep options or use alternative tools like ripgrep or ag.
.TP
.BR \-h ", " \-\-help
Display help information and exit.
.SH ARGUMENTS
.TP
.I PATTERN
Optional initial search pattern. If provided, rtgrep will start with this pattern and begin searching immediately.
.SH USAGE
.SS Interactive Mode
1. Run
.B rtgrep
without arguments to start in interactive mode
2. Type your search pattern in the input field at the bottom
3. Results appear in the output field as you type (with a 100ms delay)
4. Press
.B Enter
or
.B Escape
to exit
.SS Command Line Pattern
Run
.B rtgrep
with a pattern argument to start searching immediately:
.PP
.RS
rtgrep "function.*main"
.RE
.SS Custom Grep Command
Use a different grep command or options:
.PP
.RS
rtgrep -g "rg --color=always -n" "TODO"
.RE
.SH KEYBOARD CONTROLS
.TP
.B Backspace
Delete the last character from the search pattern
.TP
.B Enter
Exit the program and print all results to stdout
.TP
.B Escape
Exit the program and print all results to stdout
.TP
.B Printable characters (32-126)
Add character to the search pattern
.SH BEHAVIOR
.IP \(bu 2
Only one grep process runs at a time for resource efficiency
.IP \(bu 2
Grep is not executed if the input field is empty
.IP \(bu 2
New searches automatically kill previous grep processes
.IP \(bu 2
Results that exceed the output pane size show the most recent matches
.IP \(bu 2
All results are preserved and printed to stdout when exiting
.IP \(bu 2
The program searches recursively through the current directory
.SH OUTPUT
While running, rtgrep displays results in the upper pane with the format:
.PP
.RS
filename:line_number: matched_line_content
.RE
.PP
When exiting, all accumulated results are printed to stdout, making it suitable for use in pipelines or for saving results to files.
.SH EXAMPLES
.TP
Start rtgrep interactively:
.RS
rtgrep
.RE
.TP
Search for "main" function definitions:
.RS
rtgrep "int main"
.RE
.TP
Use ripgrep instead of grep:
.RS
rtgrep -g "rg --color=always -n" "TODO"
.RE
.TP
Search for header files and save results:
.RS
rtgrep "\\.h:" > header_files.txt
.RE
.SH FILES
rtgrep searches recursively through files in the current working directory using the specified or default grep command.
.SH EXIT STATUS
.B rtgrep
exits with status 0 on normal termination (Enter or Escape key).
.SH ENVIRONMENT
The program uses the system shell (/bin/sh) to execute grep commands.
.SH NOTES
.IP \(bu 2
The program redirects stdout to /dev/tty during operation to maintain the interface, then restores it when exiting
.IP \(bu 2
Color output from grep is preserved in the display
.IP \(bu 2
Maximum pattern length is 256 characters
.IP \(bu 2
Maximum line length for results is 512 characters
.IP \(bu 2
Up to 1000 output lines are stored
.SH SEE ALSO
.BR grep (1),
.BR rg (1),
.BR ag (1),
.BR find (1)
.SH AUTHOR
Written for real-time interactive file searching and code exploration.
.SH REPORTING BUGS
Report bugs and issues through the project repository.